Planetary days are an ancient & almost universal system of attributing the power of each day of the week to one of the seven traditional planets. this is encoded into our language quite obviously in some cases --as in sun day and mon (or moon) day-- and slightly more veiled in others-- such as wednesday-- but even the briefest etymological research reveals that the root is planetary days 
it appears that the structure of planetary days was initially introduced between the 6th and 8th century in babylonia, a region in which many long-ranging observational astronomical and astrological projects flourished 
this phase of babylonian culture and worship has as one of its features, naming the days for deities that were tightly synchronised with the motions of particular planets. Many cultures have some relationship between divinities or spirits and celestial obbjects, but perhaps none tied planets and divinities so tightly together. for instance, mars was associated with nergal and the sun with shamash. rites to these dieties were timed using planetary methods and techniques; if the diety was linked to mars, then it was dealt with on mars's timescale and pace. 
horoscopic astrology as practiced and defined by the hellenistic texts, and later in the roman empire, is an interesting chimera that has very obvious egyptian and babylonian/mesopotamian elements. planetary days and hours were very much part of the babylonian inheritance. they are one of the pieces of astrology that made it into the mainstream. Eventually the official roman calender adopted the seven day week with the names of the dieties that represented the powers of planets. 
this habit, encorporated into the civil calendar by the roman empire --one of the most influential empires-- was not just confined to the western world, or the mediterranean. we see this same system also emerge in india. the names are different, but it is the same seven day structure, the same planetary correlation and the same logic of assigning the gods associated with those same planets. it seems that this structure which emerges in babylonia, disperses both east and west from there. the vast majority of cultures end up coming to seven day weeks on their own, in no small part because of the infusion of ideas from the middle east, india and the roman empire.
planetary days is an astrological way of thinking about time, time with planetary qualities. the structure of a repeating seven day cycle has colonised almost the entire world. we all live inside that calendar. although many do not know what the names of the days refer to, they are nonetheless northern european god equivalents to the planets, which is the same logic we saw in babylonia in the 6th century.
in english, tuesday is named for tyr, a god whose functions encompass war, which is fitting for mars. wednesday is named for odin or wodin and the link with mercury needs some unpacking; the vanishing youth of the roman god, hermes, is very different from the all-powerful, all-father god of northern european mythology. the linkage historically used was odin's mastery of runes and language, from which he derived a lot of his power. this is language in a magical sense; he goes through a great sacrifice to achieve this power over language, and therefore, over reality. language, both mundane and magical, language which grants power is mercury's strength. thursday is thor's day; jupiter, zeus and thor are all sky gods, who have the power of thunder and lightning. friday is frieg or freya's day; there's some confusion from etymologist as to which goddess it is, but both are syncretised with venus or aphrodite. saturday is saturn's day. In a lot of the romance language, the corellations with the planets are easier and more obvious.       
to summarise, we have a structure which is nearly universal and in the majority of cases, a habit of naming the days for gods which are like the seven visible planets. we got here through diffusion in multiple direction from babylonia. of course it went with astrology, but this system has an existence and a life considerable further than babylonia. it has a level of cultural adoption that is far outside simply esoteric astrologers doing calculations.
