studying astrology is not just knowing how to read a clock. it is also knowing how to design and build a clock; that is to say, understanding the constituent pieces, what they measure and how they correlate to the other pieces. with astrological techniques, it is of course important to be introduced to and hear explanations of what they do. however, a deeper understanding of, and the ability to apply, the technique comes from contemplating how it is built and how the gears connect. 
in the planetary hours system, similar to the standard calendar, there are 24 hours in a day. i.e  that period of time is divided into 24 sections. however, with planetary hours and planetary days, the day is divided into 12 portions and so is the night. at those rare moments when day and night are equal -- i.e. equinoxes-- it will look like (fig. 1), but the diagram will twist and mutate if we are graphing the proportion of day and night at different latitudes at different times of the year. 
the order in which the planets populate the hours shown in (fig 2) is known as the chaldean or the ptolemaic order of the planets. it is also referred to as either the ascending or descending order, depending on which direction it is going. this order is the result of a very simple set of observable qualities-- which planetary bodies move fast and which move slow (observable bodies with the naked eye). this ordering, then, refers to their average speed. there are times when mercury stations retrograde or direct and moves slower than mars for a few days. but when we are looking at the average speed of the planets and the distance they cover in a given year, then we have very simple rankings. if you start with the fastest body-- the moon-- and go up to saturn, that is the ascending order. if you start with the slowest, saturn, and you come down to the moon, that is the descending. 
the idea of ascent and descent is tied directly to the conceptionalisation of the older ptolemaic universe (fig 3, graph from dante's inferno), where the bodies which are faster are closer to us and the bodies that are slower, preside over spheres which are further away. using this system, the moon is the fastest and closest sphere and then mercury, venus etc. although this construct is not accurate physically, there is some real validity to a ranking based on speed. the idea of ascending through the spheres and getting further out has a metaphysical rationale that makes a lot of sense. (I need to explain this more maybe?)
this ascending order is also visible in the way the planets are hung on the tree of life in the kabbala (fig 4). the tree of life is a more explicitly metaphysical ascent and descent. it represents, amongst other things, the descent of an idea into manifestation or the ascent of the mind/soul/spirit from being identified with materiality to higher levels of consiousness or awareness. the idea of fast being associated with our world and slow being associated with some bigger further away world is something we see in a lot of cultures. things are always changing here on earth, but if you look towards that which is eternal or long-lived, like stars, they do not seem to change relative to us. there's a contrast between that which is immediate, constantly shifting and small and that which is big, slow and eternal. the fast revolves around, or exists within, the slow. 
through using this sequence, and repeating it, we arrive at which hours get which planets in which day. we start the first hour with whatever planet is associated with that day. for instance, saturday is saturn's day so the first hour is going to be saturn's hour (fig 5) we then follow descending order. the idea with descending order is the abstract or that which isnt, becoming real. it is a materialising arc as opposed to the spiritualising arc of the ascending order. because planetary days are part of the ongoing process of creation, or the emanation of creation from void, we follow the descending order. once we have run through and descended entirely through all the spheres, we then repeat the sequence. we then have a second hour of saturn on the day of saturn. if we do the counting, the last hour of saturday night before sunday's dawn is mars. in descending order what follows after is the hour of sun, thus the first hour of the sun day's continues the sequence. this ongoing sequence of descending order which creates the planets, when you put them in a matrix of 24, it takes 7 loops to repeat. so what we have is hours creating days. 
if we take seven planets, we can connect them in a variety of ways. the can place them in a circle. we can also draw a number of lines between the different points. if we wanted to draw a seven pointed star using descending ptolemaic order, you would start with saturn go to jupiter, mars, sun, venus, mercury moon and then back to saturn. (fig 6). if you wanted to draw a septagram from the outside, you would get the days of the week from the same structure. these septagrams, drawn in different ways with this logic, are used in planetary magic (see denning & phillips on planetary magic)
what makes this difficult in practice to use everyday as a standard calendrical device is because of the ratio of night to day mutates throughout the year and how close or far from the equator you are (fig 7)
